Detailed Guide: Setting Up PuTTY (SSH) & VNC for Raspberry Pi Remote Access
This guide provides a step-by-step walkthrough to remotely control your Raspberry Pi from a Windows/Linux/Mac laptop using:

PuTTY (for SSH terminal access)

VNC Viewer (for remote desktop GUI access)

🔹 Prerequisites
Before starting, ensure:

Raspberry Pi is set up with Raspberry Pi OS (Raspbian).

It is connected to the same network as your laptop.

You know the IP address of the Pi (or how to find it).

📌 Step 1: Enable SSH on Raspberry Pi
SSH (Secure Shell) allows remote terminal access.

Method 1: Using raspi-config (Recommended)
Open Terminal on the Pi (or connect a monitor/keyboard).

Run:

bash
sudo raspi-config
Navigate to:
Interfacing Options → SSH → Yes (Enable).

Exit raspi-config.

Method 2: Manually Enable SSH
If you don’t have a monitor, create an empty ssh file on the boot partition of the SD card:

Insert the SD card into your laptop.

Create a blank file named ssh (no extension) in the boot partition.

Reinsert the SD card into the Pi and boot.

📌 Step 2: Find Raspberry Pi’s IP Address
You need the Pi’s local IP to connect via SSH/VNC.

Method 1: Check on Raspberry Pi
Run in terminal:

bash
hostname -I
Example output:
192.168.1.100 (Note this IP)

Method 2: Find via Router
Log in to your router’s admin page (usually 192.168.1.1 or 192.168.0.1).

Look for connected devices (often under DHCP Clients or Attached Devices).

Find the Raspberry Pi (hostname might be raspberrypi).

📌 Step 3: Install & Configure PuTTY (SSH) on Laptop
PuTTY is an SSH client for Windows (Linux/Mac can use built-in SSH).

For Windows:
Download PuTTY:

https://www.putty.org

Install and open.

Configure PuTTY:

Host Name (or IP address): 192.168.1.100 (Pi’s IP).

Port: 22 (default SSH port).

Connection Type: SSH.

Click Open.

First Connection Warning:

Click Yes to accept the security alert.

Login:

Default username: pi

Default password: raspberry (change if you’ve set a new one).

Now you have terminal access to your Pi!

For Linux/Mac (Terminal SSH)
Open Terminal and run:

bash
ssh pi@192.168.1.100
(Replace IP with your Pi’s address.)

📌 Step 4: Enable VNC on Raspberry Pi
VNC (Virtual Network Computing) allows remote desktop access.

Method 1: Using raspi-config
On the Pi, run:

bash
sudo raspi-config
Navigate to:
Interfacing Options → VNC → Yes (Enable).

Exit raspi-config.

Method 2: Install VNC Server Manually
Run:

bash
sudo apt update && sudo apt install realvnc-vnc-server -y
Start VNC Server
Run:

bash
vncserver
(Note the display number, e.g., :1.)

📌 Step 5: Install VNC Viewer on Laptop
Download VNC Viewer:

https://www.realvnc.com/en/connect/download/viewer/

Install and open.

Connect to Raspberry Pi:

Enter the Pi’s IP address + display number (e.g., 192.168.1.100:1).

Click Connect.

Enter username (pi) and password (raspberry by default).

Now you have full remote desktop access!

